burg slash city's tour you're watching
American history TV all weekend every
weekend on c-span three
this year marks the 50th anniversary of
the Chicago Democratic convention next
on American history TV a panel
discussion on the artists role during
the chaotic 1968 presidential nominating
convention scholars explored the impact
of musicians and their messages and
writer Norman Mailer's account of the
events they also talked about visual
artists activism and the numerous
underground newspapers of the time
Northwestern University's Medill School
of Journalism hosted this event it's an
hour and 45 minutes
I made Peck I'm professor emeritus and
service here at Medill School of
mouthful journalism media integrated
media integrated marketing
communications
I'm also 50 years out from being an
underground newspaper editor during that
week in 1968 which is indelibly stamped
in Chicago
history and certainly Chicago media
history tonight's the third of four
stops on our collective Medill journey
to explore media and the 1968 Democratic
convention throughout our recent dean
brad ham was here tonight and our
current leader Charles Whitaker is also
here tonight and he'll be on a panel
next month a plus our organizing
committee some of whom are here and
module staff have supported us greatly
so thank you guys and gals we kicked off
in May with legendary Chicago
broadcaster Bill Curtis is highly visual
look at the events of convention week
build to out new to our TV special about
the convention will premiere on the
decades network Monday August 6th at 8
p.m. Central will be air throughout
August on decades calm for our June
session we had for historians activists
and reporters talking about the Rashomon
like perspectives behind the week's
conflicts from politicians to protesters
to police some of you were here for that
c-span was here for that one and the
network's taping aired July 7th on
c-span's American c-span threes American
History TV you can view it online just
by the finding link that brings us
tonight and the artistic convention rock
music specific to the convention was
suppressed by the city's refusal to
grant permits
it's the pulsing beats and penetrating
lyrics were in the air and on the
airwaves literary figures for Norman
Mailer - Allen Ginsberg from being to
cover the political and cultural
collision and from Overground art
painting to protest papers underground
of the overground artists and media
workers produced interpretation sparked
by protests 96 and tear gas our speakers
will cover these topics tonight and I'll
introduce each speaker in turn starting
with Anthony DeCurtis
Anthony is a longtime contributing
editor for Rolling Stone where we knew
each other a Grammy Award winner a
distinguished lecturer in creative
writing and the University of
Pennsylvania and a PhD in American
literature from Indiana University
Anthony is the author of Lou Reed a life
his newest book in other words and
rockin my life away and co-writer of
Clive Davis's autobiography the
soundtrack of my life a New York Times
bestseller and fYI panelists books are
available after the presentation behind
the curtain right now though Anthony
will chart how Rock provided the pulsing
beat for 68 for the changes in perhaps
speak to its role today Anthony oh thank
you oh thank you I'm just gonna we're
gonna kind of I'm gonna not exactly read
this but I mean there's a lot to talk
about with 1968 and you know hopefully
you know we'll get to most of it I you
know I took a a song lyric that you're
probably most of you know a quote from a
street fighting man by the Rolling
Stones and you know what can a poor boy
do except sing for a rock and roll band
in sleepy London town there's just no
place for a street fighting man
it's like Jagger wrote those lyrics
after attending of Vietnam protests in
London in which the protesters were kind
of pushed away from the American Embassy
by you know by by Chicago standards
video rather polite London cops
nonetheless they did have batons and
we're using them
but Jagger complained to the events
organizers that the protesters should
have fought back they should have they
should not have yielded the song was
banned by the BBC and Jagger sent the
lyrics to a British underground magazine
called the black dwarf was run by a guy
named tarik Ali who was sort of a major
London political activist and he gave
them permission to reprint them you know
the song though captures I think some of
the the complexity of artists engaging
in political action you know the song
kind of like The Beatles song revolution
which John Lennon wrote which came out
in 1968 also you know Lennon was kind of
agonizing over you know what the role of
the Beatles and you know musicians
should be at that time and you know
there's the famous line but if you talk
about destruction don't you know that
you can count me out then in a in a much
harsher re-recorded version you know
Lennon sings don't you know that you can
count me out in and I don't think
anything you know kind of captures the
ambivalence that you know artists felt
you know it's one thing to go to a
benefit and it's one thing to make a
donation it's one thing to show up
somewhere and play some songs but it
quickly became clear to people that
regardless of the kind of beliefs and
convictions that they held you know
about the Vietnam War and other issues
coming to Chicago is going to be a
different a different story back to a
Jagger I mean the black dwarf a you know
it's a little hard to reconstruct
exactly you know how seriously political
the stones seemed in 1968 I mean you
know now you know they're still actively
touring and and playing quite well I
have to say but you know I don't think
anybody expects them to be revolutionary
in 1968 people did and there was a
actually a story in the black dwarf with
the headline marks angles Mick Jagger
and the the you know this was something
that was you know in the air you know
the kind of counterculture was forming
there was a sense of rock and roll you
know partly by by virtue of Dylan's
going electric infused rock-and-roll
with you know some of the social
ambition and idealism of folk music at
that very moment that he started playing
rock'n'roll of course Dylan more or less
abandoned politics but you know people
did look to you know the Beatles and The
Rolling Stones and other artists of that
time James Brown you know for you know
some kind of political inside political
guidance and political vision and you
know the year before in 1967 there was a
kind of there was a sense of a kind of
revolution of consciousness
you know people talked about the Summer
of Love you know the Beatles were kind
of central figures and that you know
Sergeant Pepper this idea that you know
if you took LSD or you could if you
altered your consciousness you would
alter the world by 1968 people had had
moved away from that idea part of what
radicalized people was what went on here
in Chicago at that convention but people
were getting radicalized by other events
as well things were moving very quickly
you know but as tariq Ali said at one
point culture is intervening in politics
it meant in 1967 it was the Summer of
Love revolution of consciousness but by
early 1968 you had the Tet Offensive in
Vietnam which made it clear that you
know there was no light at the end of
the
no you know it was a you know very the
the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese
were you know kind of launched attacks
across South Vietnam that really made it
clear that the war was was nowhere near
over and that it was going to be a fight
you know that was that was not something
that Americans were pleased to hear or
prepared to hear of course there was the
murder of Martin Luther King in April of
1968 and also the riots that resulted
from that which from you know here in
Chicago provided something of the
backdrop to some of the stuff that went
on at the at the convention there was
the shooting of Andy Warhol in 1968 the
murder of Robert Kennedy and of course
the rebellions in Paris you know that
was one of the things that
what that was one of the things that
also you know Jagger saw as an
inspiration you know writing street
fighting man but in a way that it would
have been unthinkable just a few years
before that you would have expected
rock-and-roll stars to show up you know
at a demonstration that was something
that was anticipated in in 1968 now some
of the organizers of what became known
as the festival of life the point of
view of Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin
and the hippies was that the Democratic
convention was a festival of death you
know they were the architects of the
Vietnam War and but they wanted to have
a more anarchic festival of life
the problem with that was that the
anarchy
kind of leaked into things like the
preparation for what these what the
demonstrations were gonna be you know
musicians were seen as standard bearers
and they certainly tried to get
musicians to come but increasingly as
kind of word leaked out largely you know
from the hippies themselves I mean they
were talking about things like you know
pouring LSD in the water system in
Chicago and you know all kinds of you
know kind of crazy stuff
that if you were thinking about going
there it also had the effect of
dampening the turnout for the or the at
least what was predicted to be the
turnout you know for those
demonstrations and certainly were the
turnouts for demonstrations before and
after in other parts of the country
because you know there was a perception
that it was going to be a kind of
dangerous scene one of the musicians
that they tried to recruit was country
Joe McDonald who would the following
year give a rousing performance at the
Woodstock Festival but he said you know
he was interested in coming and
performing he arranged for some shows at
that weekend at the electric theater in
town and he said that he would talk to
other musicians about about coming but
as they got closer and you know
certainly it was becoming clear how the
city of Chicago is going to respond to
demonstrations and what the
demonstrations were going to be like
when when Jerry Rubin and Abbie Hoffman
went to see country Joe at the electric
theater here in town to ask him well are
you gonna be performing at the festival
of life you know this was country Joe
describing this at the actually during
the trial of the chicago 7 as he was
testifying I said to Abbie Hoffman no I
was not going to be in the festival
because the vibrations in town was so
incredibly vicious that I felt it was
impossible to avoid violence on the part
of the police and the authorities in
Chicago I felt that my group's symbolic
support of the festival had to be
withdrawn because there would be a
possibility that people would follow us
to the festival and be clubbed and maced
and tear gassed by the police and that
the possibility of anything positive or
loving or good coming out of that City
at that time was impossible and that I
had no choice but to withdraw my support
nonetheless he was attacked and beaten
after his second show by people who you
know kind of recognized him as a hippie
and just decided that was enough to
warrant his getting a beat down the only
rock band to perform at the festival was
the mc5 you know from Detroit a radical
band from Michigan associated with the
white panther party whose platform
consisted of rock-and-roll dope sex in
the streets and the abolition of
capitalism was led by John Sinclair and
you know who was you know himself a poet
and an artist and an activist very
you know and a very sincere one the you
know the mc5 did come to play as Abe
mentioned the city refused to grant
permits you know for a stage and for a
sound system and all of this and here's
Wayne Kramer who actually the guitarist
for the mc5 who went 40 years later in
2008 to Denver to participate in
demonstrations at the Democratic
convention there he goes you know every
40 years I go in protest against me I go
in protest against the Democrats is what
he said but um he was describing what it
was like in 1968 there's their seconds
of footage that you can find of all this
you know online but here's his
description there was no stage there was
no flatbed truck there was no sound
system there were no porta toilets there
was no electricity we had to run an
electrical cord from the hotdog stand
to power our gear we played on the
ground in the middle of Lincoln Park in
Chicago with the crowd all around us
sitting on the ground in the back or in
the back standing I'm going to guess
there were maybe 3,000 young people
there and it was very tense the Chicago
police had been very aggressive and very
intimidating all day and even though it
was a rock concert and we were the only
band to play it didn't feel like a rock
concert there was a dark cloud over the
day because we knew the likelihood of
people being hurt was great as soon as
we finished playing the police started
attacking the crowd these waves of blue
helmeted Club swinging Chicago police
officers a few other artists I should
say did come to the protests Phil Ochs
whose work some of you may be familiar
with a extremely powerful and important
folk artist came and you know you could
see pictures of him performing and he's
just got his acoustic guitar and
somebody's holding a microphone in front
of him
you know that was the kind of setup that
he had and Mary Travers and peter Yarrow
from Peter Paul and Mary also both came
and also performed under you know
similar circumstances to you know to
what Phil Ochs had dare you know as I
was you know thinking about this looking
back on it you know people are always
asking me you know what's going on now
you know how does this connect yeah
there are there are many many I think
connections although I have to say I do
believe that the present time is far
worse there was you know as polarized as
things were a dent then you know I think
this situation is much more extreme now
and also you know but you hear a similar
kind of rhetoric I mean there was a
really Phil Ochs you know returned from
Chicago you know just stunned by what
had happened here but you know he's
talking the kind of talk that you know
he's gotten gotten the left in trouble
over the years they were just saying we
just have to boycott this election you
know it's not gonna make any difference
you know whether it's Humphrey or Nixon
you know and obviously I mean to one
degree or another that might have been
true but you know there finally was a
diction a difference between Humphrey
and Nixon there were further rollouts I
mean obviously someone like John
Sinclair became came to John Lennon's
attention later and you know as Lenin
became friends with Abbie Hoffman and
Jerry Rubin he came to Michigan wrote a
song about Johnson Clair and he came
there to do a benefit for him that of
course led to the FBI investigations of
John Lennon and the efforts to deport
him these days
you know I think you know music you know
there isn't this kind of centrality you
know there's a lot more media there's a
lot more music around there
enough issues to keep anybody busy but
you know one of the things that people
complained about the Beatles song
revolution was you the line it's going
to be alright which people saw as you
know this rich guy I just think it's
sure it's all gonna work out fine but
you know that's the title of a great
Kendrick Lamar song that that also has
become an anthem at the moment and it
was just you know rightly seen as a
statement of optimism in the face of you
know tremendous difficulties being faced
by the black community and and everybody
else at the moment and there's a great
you know childish gambino song called
this is America that also has been I
think an inspiration for many people
these days so the sense of you know the
connection of music and politics
something we can you know continue to
talk about but you know it wasn't the
president presence at the demonstration
that it could have been you know for all
of those reasons that I described so but
thank you very much thanks Anthony well
we're going to take questions at the end
so our next speaker is David Denby David
is a staff writer and film critic for
The New Yorker
he too is a best-selling author his
books Chronicle everything from core
curricula to fight his financial
misadventures during the.com bust and
the rise of snark in social media an
ever growing topic that probably needs a
sequel tonight as he recently did a very
very good article in Harper's Magazine
David will trace Norman Mailer's
literary contributions to the
chronicling of late 1967 and 1968 David
wrote to me for all this despair over
Vietnam mailers armies of the night a
literary journalism masterpiece is a
hopeful book but mailer and Miami in the
siege of Chicago chronicles America
turning fatally toward disaster first
the dreaded ascension of Richard Nixon
at the Republican convention and then
the chaos of Chicago with Hubert
Humphrey liberal fires long banked
wedded to the platitudes at LBJ's
hapless strategy for the war MELAS
literary legacy however it survives
David Miami and the siege of Chicago
like armies is written with an
impassioned power of observation and
recreation that rivals Whitman's poetry
here to tell us more about it David
Denby well you sort of did it I don't
I'll just I'm sort of involved in a
personal effort to of restoration of
mailers reputation at least for his
nonfiction work the library of America
is you know our play odd is bringing out
his work now they've done they issued a
lot of the sixties stuff including this
I'll get to the reason why he's in such
disrepute I mean it's pretty obvious and
those of you who have followed these
things
this book has I've read twice in the
last year and it's in this terrible time
as Anthony said has I have founded
fortifying mailer got going as a
political writer in 1960 and maybe a few
people here remember I was I guess in
high school and he covered the Kennedy
convention and nobody had ever read
political journalism quite like that he
began by saying for once let us try to
think of a political convention without
losing ourselves in housing projects of
fact an issue now in fact Mahler was
very good at fact an issue when he put
his mind to it he wrote a book about
going to the moon shadi wrote a book but
execution of Gary Gilmore about Lee
Harvey Oswald's early life in in Russia
but when he got to be doing these
convention pieces was not you know
delegate counts and so on that he was
after although he had some of it the
convention is a gathering of ambitious
and established or insurgent in some
cases people from all over the country
and he wanted to look at the faces
the bodies the voices the sound of
crowds the decor of the rooms I mean you
can imagine what he would do with this
place in positive and negative ways so
to speak the unconscious of the event
the the backwash you know everything to
get away from ordinary reporting with
the intent of capturing the soul of the
country and with the secondary intent of
marshaling physical evidence into some
sort of powerful series of metaphors he
put himself into the center of the
action why because as he records what he
perceives he's also his consciousness of
what he's doing and what he's seeing is
changing and he's having fresh
perceptions from a slightly different
further point down the road of
consciousness in other words it's a kind
of positive loop a positive feedback
loop anyone who ever tries to do this
will fall dead in about five pages if
you even get that far so in no way is
this a model for anyone else now when
you talk of his virtues I what I hinted
that I might as well just give you an
example of what the problem is this is
from the the Kennedy piece yeah just
it's nothing terrible it just indicates
a kind of period and personal attitudes
one of the private amusements of the
Convention was to divine some of the
qualities of the candidates by the style
of the young women who put on hats and
clothing in politics and the colors of
one presidential gent or another of
course half of them must have been hired
models but someone did the hiring and
it's fair to look for a common
denominator the Johnson girls tended to
be plump pie-faced dumb sexy southern
the Symington that's the Stuart
Symington girls seem to touch em yulish
stubborn good-looking pluggers the
Kennedy ladies were the handsomest but
the Stevenson girls look to be doing it
for no money they were good sorts
slightly hoarse he faced
one had the impression they played field
hockey in college
well alright it's it's funny and it's
it's not inaccurate because women were
not in highest stated political
conventions in 1960 but I'm just I
couldn't help thinking if those were
posses of men he might have looked for
some sign of resistance in those faces
to their assigned tasks I mean in other
words was assumed that women would
simply be herded around and and you know
play dumb he covered the Goldwater
Convention also for Esquire and then
armies of the night which is I think of
American prose masterpiece October 1967
I don't know how many people it was a
hundred thousand or so come down to
Washington come up to Washington to
invest the Pentagon we mean meaning to
try to charge into its halls a few
people actually did get in there you
couldn't imagine what happened to them
and the hippies from California in New
York also intended to levitate the
Pentagon three feet I see some people
nodding by with Hindu chants right if I
got the religion right out and saying
out demon out the point was to raise it
three feet off the ground and to
exorcise it of it's poison
that gives you an idea of the late
sixties it was a kind of as well as
despair and violence a kind of manic
creativity I mean no other argument had
worked and trying to end the war why not
try this one the text came out in
Harper's most of it in the last portion
in commentary and then you heard the
dreadful events of the spring and early
summer of 68 a sense that the country
was coming apart unraveling the
Republican convention of August 3rd
through the 9th was a reactionary
attempt to Ravel it back up again
and I must say that mailer gives Nixon
gives the devil his due he looks for
signs of the new Nixon I don't know if
you remember the new Nixon as opposed to
the awful phony dick Nixon of 1952 who
embarrassed those those of us who had
more delicate sensibilities even if we
were eight and he does he parses Nixon
speeches and he has his mailer way of
doing it which is to interject himself
into the lines of the speech with sort
of interrogation with comments with
sarcasm with suspense what's he going to
do next like that so you have a kind of
intercourse between the two of them on
the page on to Chicago the book begins
with of evocation of Chicago he felt the
chagrin that all New Yorkers feel when
they come to Chicago because it's an
even greater City than New York that's
that's my been my impression the last
few days he does that you know the
architecture the river the stockyards
which were still in operation in 1968
the the smell of the stockyards the
fabulous Mahler knows you know that
could smell a fart at a hundred paces he
can smell the stockyards or you know
every night all through the convention
and the awful depression that hung over
the convention for many reasons first of
all the death of Bobby Kennedy in June
and the convention practically comes to
a dead halt I'm gonna ask you to hold us
yeah sorry
okay somewhere between sorrow and the
blind sword of patriotism was the
fulcrum of reasonable politics and as
the film progressed the film that was
shown at the convention devoted to Bobby
Kennedy one saw seen after senior Bobby
Kennedy Robert Kennedy growing older a
kind of happiness came back from the
image for something in his face grew
young over the years he looked more like
a boy on the day of his death a nice boy
nicer than the kid with the sharp rocky
glint in his eye who had gone to work
for Joe McCarthy in the early 20s and
had then known everything there was to
know about getting ahead in politics he
had grown modest as he grew older and
his wit had grown with him he had become
a funny man as the picture took care to
show Wray simple for one instant shy and
off to the side on the next but with a
sort of marvelous boys wisdom as if he
knew the world was very bad and knew the
intimate style of how it was bad as only
boys can sometimes know I found this in
particular that passage moving because I
saw Bobby Kennedy three days before he
died gave his speech to Latino audience
in San Jose California and it was
exactly as he says he was shy and then
he was empathic he was funny it was a
fantastic performance
LBJ controlled the convention in order
to get Humphrey through but as you know
there was still chaos the delegates into
in fistfights the media roughed up and
all the chaos outside the underlying
question for me was how could the
delegates not understand that the only
way the party could be dick Nixon was
was to turn against the war and as many
pages devoted to how politics works in
terms of obligations and favors and
property another element of the of the
tragedy was was the figure of Eugene
McCarthy who was a brilliant man in many
ways we've had great courage to take on
Johnson at all in spring of 1968 and who
was infuriatingly diffident he was
unimpacted and speech he would not rile
up the crowd
now you would not play the game here was
not a mixer he seemed like a professor
you know he wrote poetry and hung out
with Robert Lowell and all the stuff
that drove me nuts
I was for iowa's for Bobby and mailers
but both pages of interviewing him
talking to him and comes out with great
respect for his his toughness McCarthy
said something that now to me at least
is heartbreaking he said on the day of
the nominating convention the nominating
speeches and so on
meaning him and his supporters we're not
asking for much just the modest use of
intelligence just the modest use of
intelligence I heard now this has to be
the most heartbreaking sentence in
American politics I mean a modest use of
intelligence seems completely utopian
and beyond and there is a prescient
passage in this book in in which Mahler
says that the that white people's
irritation with blacks pressing their
demands would lead somewhere down the
road to a demagogue who would take power
and move the country to the right I mean
I I'm not reading it but it's there that
was written you know in in the summer of
1968 as against the mildness of McCarthy
the power drive of the daily machine the
mayor not to have his city taken over by
Jewish and wasp
media elites from California and New
York and long-haired or whatever
he thought they were you know with their
foul mouths and free love of politics
his property and this was his property
he can't face Humphrey it makes him so
sick but then there are these
descriptions of Daly's goons
they were sitting right in front of
they're sitting right in front of the of
the dais
so that McCarthy or anyone else who was
anti-war had to face them some of them
had eyes like drills others noses like
plows jaws like amputated knees they
combed their hair straight with a part
to the side and imitation of the mayor
who from up close had a red skin with
many veins and hair which looked like a
dirty gray silk combed out straight at
his worst daily looked in fact like a
vastly robust old peasant woman with a
dirty gray silk wig at any rate no small
matter to have the Illinois delegation
under your nose at the podium all those
hecklers fixed his flunkies and muscle
men scanning the audience as if to
freeze certain obstreperous faces make
them candidates for a contract and a hit
so gangsters in the flesh at this time
he was Mel is not a participant in
Washington he threw himself you know
towards the military police got himself
arrested and makes a long scene and
everything about being arrested and the
night he spent in jail and so on he
pulls back for various reasons the most
salient of which is that they calculates
he can't write 30 or 40 thousand words
whatever it is for Harper's in the next
three or four weeks to get it into the
magazine before the election if he's
been clubbed and maced
he also says maybe I'm just scared you
cannot deny this guy the most engaging
candor whether even if you find him
pretentious and overbearing
he loves what's happening to his country
and he also low low loves his country
he's no revolutionary he's 45 he has six
children and two houses for god sakes so
he withdraws to the Hilton but he has a
different kind of experience and it
shows that for a journalist that
perspective even if you've got you know
seemingly the wrong perspective can be
put to use from within the Hilton under
siege
on the third day of the convention
what where is it Dave
the Hilton he been staggered through a
variety of attacks and breakdowns like
an old fort like the old fort of the old
Democratic Party about to fall forever
beneath the ministrations of its high
Shaymin it's excruciatingly warlock
that's LBJ derided by the young held in
contempt by its own soldiers the very
delegates who would be loyal to Humphrey
in the nomination and loyal to nothing
in their heart this spiritual fort of
the Democratic Party was now housed in
the literal fort of the Hilton
staggering in places all boilers working
all motors vibrating yet seeming to come
apart from the pressures on the street
outside as if the old Hilton had become
artifact of the party of the nation the
police had tried to gas the kids out of
the park when they first arrived in
numbers from Lincoln Park but the wind
blew the wrong way blew the tears across
the street into the air conditioning of
the hilton lobby and delegates and press
and officials walked about with smarting
eyes burning throats and the presentment
that they were going to catch a cold the
lobby stunk so the hippies didn't put
LSD in the in the water supply but but
the tear gas got in too so to speak the
body politic the Hilton and it was talk
about the backwash of the event the
unconscious of the event it was part of
the breathing itself the next day the
police rioted and there was a sickening
attack the peaceful march down Michigan
and just a little bit of that I have a
few minutes
they're dammed by police on three sides
and cut off from the wagons of the poor
people's March they're right beneath the
windows of the Hilton which looked down
on Grant Park and Michigan Avenue the
stationery March was abruptly attacked
the police attacked with tear gas with
Mason with clubs they attacked like a
chainsaw cutting into wood the teeth of
the saw the edge of their clubs they
attacked like a scythe through grass
lines of 20 and 30 policemen striking
out in the arc their clubs beating
demonstrators fleeing scene from
overhead from the 19th floor it was like
a wind blowing dust or the edge of waves
riding foam on the shore everyone said
at the time and you've probably heard it
if you've been to these earlier meetings
of this conference it was Vietnam on
Michigan Avenue
it was Vietnam it was power it was
devastation the next day he made an
appearance before the kids who were left
and he apologized profusely for being
yellow and not joining them and he was
very touched because bunches of them
said write it write it so I have and
then he wrote this in a few weeks I have
found this book fortifying in the last
two years the last year or so and I've
read it twice because as Anthony said
this time is even worse and 68 I'm at
least the Democratic Party is not you
know enshrined in chagrin and dismay I
mean it's not rift in that way it wasn't
that rift but the intensity of his
response through a different set of
circumstances with occasional prescient
shafts as such as I mentioned have just
been so powerful to read as prose and as
emotion as sensibility as taste as
literature that I felt stronger just by
reading these books this book twice so
thank you very much
thanks David we're gonna switch over to
kind of more visual element here first
brought hoops sorry about that first
brought to us by Patricia Kelly
Trish is an associate professor of
contemporary art history and associate
dean a car University of Art and Design
in in British Columbia she holds a PhD
from the University of British Columbia
but she has roots in Chicago she's a
former professor at DePaul Trish was
written extensively on art and
architecture including the essay art and
politics Chicago style
2008 for an exhibit at the ploy
University's Art Museum tonight Trish is
going to illustrate herself how the
city's artists and painters responded to
the week's official violence Trish okay
thanks everyone um first of all I wanted
to say thanks to a band to the great
stuff at Medill for helping us in a
climate izing all of us to the
presentation tonight so thanks so much
for that tonight I want to really think
about some questions like what exactly
is it not on oh just closer okay so I
want to think about some questions
tonight like what exactly is the
relationship between politics and art in
Chicago today and what ways and through
what material forms does art redefine
itself in relation or in response to
ideological conflict and also what are
the strategy is that visual artists use
to intervene in and perhaps redefine
pressing social concerns
well the tensions between politics and
art are not new in 1968 arguing that the
events in Chicago in late August
functioned as a pressure point of sorts
within the art establishment and by that
I mean high-end art galleries artists
who were you know trading for lots of
money and collected by very wealthy
Chicago patrons and specifically I want
to think about what are the ways in
which that convention and the artistic
response we said or that relationship
and in that way participatory democracy
and committed social
activism evident in the protest movement
and certainly on the streets at the time
set off discursive debates regarding the
potential of culture to contribute to
you and even transform political or
social circumstances the contemplative
art viewer that stands stationary in
front of a painting on a gallery wall
was at this moment reconstituted as an
active embodied engaged participant and
that has implications even today and at
the end I'll talk just a little bit
about what that means to Chicago art
today but we can always get more to that
in the question and answer period
sure
okay sure one sec everyone
[Music]
don't look it's preview you want to see
it live
[Music]
no I think they need them
I did want to remind all of you that
there are screens back there I was
thinking I was going to be in a larger
space so my slides are a little small
and I apologize for that but if you need
to you can always turn around or I can
send you the images later if you like
I'm used to big lecture halls with big
screens
[Music]
that's good okay thanks Rafi okay this
is not to say that art protest was new
to Chicago in 1968 in fact a vibrant
community of activists artists sponsored
activism began in the 1950s with the
monster roster and and others
specifically emanating out of Hyde Park
but it took a decidedly anti-war turn in
1966 with the formation of Chicago
against the artists sorry Chicago
artists against the war in Vietnam which
was a branch of a New York
organization and Dominic DeMaio whose
work year see here is one founding
member of that group artists such as
DeMaio Robert Donnelly Donald Maine and
Jim Falconer founded this branch of
artists against the war with DeMaio's
Kinzie Street Studios serving as a base
of operations and this is kind of the
kind of image that was produced so
images of you know very propagandistic
quite crass and they're representational
strategy is meant to very clearly
portray the message DeMaio produced this
while a faculty member at the Art
Institute made a bunch of copies and
handed it out on Michigan Avenue to
students and tourists alike trying to
kind of drum up some anti-war sentiment
but this kind of straight-up art
propaganda is very different from what
he was producing at the same time so
here's one of his collage paintings of
the same moment his untitled yellow
background with skull and while this
work often would show skull bones
appendages there was no kind of direct
correlation between the collage
paintings and what was happening in
current political events so and not
slippage between what artists were doing
in their forms of activism and what they
were doing in their own studio work is
very common at that time
here we just see a one of a few images
I'm going to show you a protest march
that the group participated in you can
see their banner in the background there
Chicago artists for peace in Vietnam and
at the time DeMaio among other members
of the group were really mirroring what
was happening in other American cities
so artists were often banding together
for political activism sometimes
producing props or imagery such as you
see in the slide on the bottom where
these skulls were produced by Merriam
Barofsky and a Chicago artist who was
very much working to produce his kind of
props for just to bring kind of further
attention to the group's participation
in these in these protest marches so
artist Chicago artists against the war
in Vietnam like groups in New York we
have groups in New York that are doing
angry arts weeks or producing portfolios
of anti-war images for sale to fund
different different protest
organizations but largely it stayed out
of their own practice or imagery but
here I'm sure you work by Barnett Newman
who I'm gonna talk a little bit about
later in in the discussion and just to
think about what was the norm then for
studio production in New York Chicago at
the time and there were some differences
but I'll get to that as well
so such emergent political activism
amongst artists in the 1960s in the
resultant shifts in the manner of
representation that they enacted needs
to really be put in context with what
were dominant artistic modes of the day
and in the u.s. overtly propagandistic
art was very much not popular in
specifically because of a cold war
context so coming out of the Cold War
any kind of propagandistic art was very
much seen as Soviet or communist in
nature and so typically we saw us
artists at least those artists who were
selling well moving more towards
abstraction but that doesn't mean it
wasn't political as we see with Barnett
Newman's one of his Stations of the
Cross here one of 14 paintings he
produced right around 1964 1965 but
which kind of
and in tonight for his typical style
Newman is known for these large-scale
paintings which so vertical stripes what
he later called zips in part in response
to the pop artist Andy Warhol's Fame so
he's looking for something a little more
jazzy to talk about in relation to his
work and those vertical stripes or zips
became for Newman a stand-in for the
human condition so um so Newman when
this was his signature style from 1948
onward very much saw his work as
existential in nature he was a devout
anarchist was against the US government
completely and in fact he once argued
about this work in 1964 when asked what
this work meant by it by someone who was
interviewing he said if people really
understood it it would be the end of all
state capitalist in totalitarian society
pretty big claim for a stripe however
you know that was the kind of
authenticity and commitment that Newman
brought to his practice and he wasn't
alone I'm sure many of you are familiar
with the work of Jackson Pollock who
similarly similarly saw in that drip
painting a kind of existential crisis of
the individual so this was the politics
that Newman was invested in prior to
1968 but as we'll see in a few minutes
one brief kind of blip or response to
the 1968 Democratic convention this kind
of work was not really political enough
and again to think about in that
lingering Cold War climate the most
influential art critic of the day his
name is Clement Greenberg read such work
so despite Newman's claim it was
political he read such work as being
just largely formal in nature so not
really connected to that political
comment in fact when Greenman were
speaking in 1967 to fill lighter than
editor of Artforum
a new art periodical of the day still a
pretty important art periodical argued
quote I prefer to live as if there's no
connection between politics and art
unquote to which Greenberg readily
so that sense of you know what can the
art object do was pretty pretty
repressed um then bring that to Chicago
and I really I think this juxtaposition
of slides kind of demonstrates the
conundrum by the time that the
convention 1968 had already been a
pretty difficult year on April 4th
Martin Luther King was assassinated on
June 5th Bobby Kennedy when vice
president Hubert Humphrey won the
Democratic nomination many felt the
election itself was meaningless and and
that brings up the events in Chicago on
the one side on the right we have Mayor
Daley and autocratic leader who vowed to
maintain stability in his city at all
cost in the weeks leading up to the
convention Daley denied public permits
for marches and demonstrations doubled
the strength of the Chicago Police Force
and brought in the US Army and the
Illinois National Guard Corps saying and
I quote as long as I'm mayor of this
city there will be law and order on the
streets unquote on the other hand is
represented here by just one of the
Flyers from a yippie the yippie festival
of life we have Abbie Hoffman and Jerry
Rubin of the hippies who organized what
they called an invasion of Chicago
complete with demonstrations
I guess as Anthony has told us limited
public concerts and and other kinds of
activities meant to really bring a kind
of farcical view of the proceedings in
fact so farcical that they nominate a
pig Pegasus for president to promote the
events the hippies all also published
flyers much like what you're seeing here
and held rallies that were meant to
really circulate farcical rumors such as
hippies would pick up delegates at the
airport and drive them to Wisconsin or
hyper potent male yuppies would be used
to seduce delegate wives or as I already
was mentioned LSD would be dumped in the
city's water supply and I think the one
that the mayor really took seriously
surrounding the amphitheater and barbed
wire protection that the amphitheater
would be stormed
such tactics really played on the
paranoia the city's conservative
constituents to incite fear confusion
misunderstanding a kind of form of
guerrilla performance art I would argue
reliant on improvisation and satire here
are just a couple of scenes of the of
the protests and the class between clash
between dailies forces of course in
protesters began almost immediately with
the violent intensifying as the
convention wore on one of the worst
confrontations taking place the
following taking place the in the 26th
in front of the headquarters of the
Democratic Party the Hilton Hotel at the
corner of Michigan and Balboa avenues as
protesters hurled walks bottles and
expletives the police fought back with
mace clubs and even motorcycles as
chronicled in the Walker report were
used by some patrolmen to run down
people in the streets and I apologize
again for the smallness of the slide so
here's what I'm going to get to the
artistic response
so immediately artists responded to this
conundrum we have one of the first
artists to respond was Barnett Newman
who wrote a letter on September 3rd to
the to the Art Institute then director
Charles Cunningham to ask that his own
work be removed from an upcoming
exhibition arguing that you know he
didn't want to be part of an exhibition
in a city what where such brutality was
imminent a few days later Jesse Wright
checker professor of painting at
Berkeley and a New York artist had a
stern proposed a two-year art boycott of
the city asking artists and they got
over 75 artists reported about this in
the New York time with all the artists
listed who said that they would not show
any work in Chicago for two years they
argued at that time quote the recent
actions by Chicago police directed and
supported by Mayor Daley of mark the
city as unfit for membership in a
civilized society as painters and
sculptors we know that art cannot exist
where repression and brutality are
tolerated the same day closed Oldenburg
an artist who had grew up in Chicago who
was at the convention and caught up
quite literally in the violence
sent a letter to the Chicago art dealer
Richard Fagin which you see well you
probably don't see here but it is
they're cancelling a one-man show at
Figgins gallery scheduled to open
October 23rd and in the letter he argues
quote a gentle one-man show about
pleasure seems a bit obscene in the
present context unquote um never the bad
businessman Richard Fagan as a way to
avert a negative impact the boycott
would have on Chicago museums and
gallery he proposed an alternative the
Richard a Dale Richard J daily protest
show an exhibition intended to
demonstrate the outrage of many
left-leaning artists many of the artists
initially agreeing to a boycott now
changed their allegiance to participate
in the show one New York artist
participating in the show was James
Rosen Crist wasn't Crist here produced
them the figure of Merit Daly became a
dominant symbol throughout the show as
perhaps not surprising I'm here wasn't
questioners known for his silkscreen
work produced a silkscreen of Daly's
head-on pink and white plastic that was
actually cut so that as you can see on
the image that was printed in Newsweek
in a review of the show you the viewer
can actually participate in the work by
disrupting those pink ribbons and in
another point in the exhibition it was
hung in the center of the gallery
with a fan behind it so that the image
could never be completely still so some
artists like Rosenquist here were
interested in making direct political
statements producing work parroting the
image of Mayor Daley himself
the New York Thompson and that was
common we'll see a few more of them in a
minute but the New York Times estimated
that the show was so popular about
10,000 people came to the exhibition
before I traveled to the Contemporary
Art Center in Cincinnati where it opened
on December 20th and 68 and then a
reduced version of the show which
included I think only about 40 works
there was 65 in the original show made a
brief stop in Figgins gallery in New
York so we had one gallery at the time
in Chicago and another one in New York
this gallery in New York has still exist
another work calling up mayor Daly on
the left by close Oldenburg are drawing
one of two drawings he did for a
colossal monument in Chicago which was
subtitled Daly's head on a platter so
meant to be an a cited it right on
basically in Grant Park and on the white
she created fifty of the images that you
see here kind of reworking or remaking
of the very distinctive Chicago fire
hydrant and when they were originally
installed in faggins gallery they were
all put together on the floor each one's
a couple feet tall and they look like
little bodies kind of each one was
individualized little bodies kind of
broken or reworked we've used the show
in the Chicago trib in the New York
Times described it as eclectic exciting
and visually overwhelming with others
working in a variety of representational
abstract styles no clear consensus on
how to register descent or how to
actually articulate a response to the
political violence was was really kind
of forthcoming grace cleric in the New
York Times argued quote by and large the
show goes in for the quick journalistic
jab relying heavily on boyish khatallah
G name-calling and sight-gags
to make its protest points Luke's
assessment underscores the larger
dilemma facing artists interested in
using their work as a direct means of
ideological engagement how to maintain
artistic integrity or avoid the trap of
pure propaganda and here's a there's
also a kind of tension that comes out of
Phi again so between New York and
Chicago about two-thirds of the artists
in the show wear knee work from New York
many of which were not here during the
week of convention related violence so
this actually speaks a little bit to it
Hun's greater a german artist but who
lived in the Midwest and Iowa and was a
was here at the Chicago the Chicago
protests produced a work that looks a
lot like more Robert Morris a very
famous at the time minimalist artist in
New York his mirror and cubes but this
time they're shot through with a rifle
some artists though felt they couldn't
respond and in fact they needed to
include the kind of signature work that
always been connected to such as Robert
Motherwell here Motherwell was a artist
who with long had a history of political
commitment and activism and liberal
causes but didn't want to show work that
actually called that forth was instead
really interested in in producing work
or lending work that called up his
abstract paintings but here's the piece
I want to get to a piece that was
produced in 68 by Barnett Newman
specifically in relation to what's
happening one of two monuments that he
produced in response to the show this
one called lace-curtain for mayor Daly
and I think this demonstrates the kind
of complications artists were really
facing 6 foot by 4 foot barbed wire
sculpture splattered with red paint a
kind of blood like red paint was meant
by Newman to really call up some of the
the actual crowd pushers that were used
by jeeps during the convention violence
and so here we have that that zip that
he we saw in his previous work doesn't
really do it anymore
right you have to go to something more
direct more propagandistic Newman's work
also and I just want to flip back to
this slide here just so you can think
about the title of the work was actually
a direct response to Mary daily on the
convention floor the network's muted his
mic at the time but Abraham Ribicoff a
senator from Illinois was speaking in
daily hurled anti-semitic slurs at him
so in response Newman a Jewish artist
from New York pearls back the
lace-curtain Irish which is um bringing
up daily zone ethnicity and meant to
call up a kind of convention and you
know this this idea that you can mask an
unrefined nature with the trappings of
of lace right hanging those lace
curtains in the window
this FICO then brought about other
responses in the city so on ten
galleries banded together to on a series
of shows through November 1968 ten
different galleries much of these were
populated with Chicago artists partially
in response to foggins faggins group and
in indeed they they even held benefits
through all of these exhibitions for the
ACLU which was helping to pay for legal
defense for those who were being
prosecuted prosecuted from the protest a
couple images in some of these shows
right here Carol Sumner is killed for
piece which was part of an artist in
writers protest portfolio so a portfolio
produced to fund the anti-war effort a
lot of the proceeds from this portfolio
went to the SDS and then on the white
William Regis collage work this one
titled Richard is a wise old owl where
Daly's faces kind of put in a collage of
a police badge and on the body of an owl
and that work was shown at the Richard
gray gallery the MCA held an exhibition
violence and recent American art this
was scheduled before the convention but
took a decidedly different turn
including the exhibition catalog that
you're looking at here which now was
comprised of headlines from recent
newspapers and even the work including
Andy Warhol's race riot which you see on
the top was represented as if a new in a
news tabloid or portfolio so we're the
artists were we're trying to think
through through these various venues
what does it mean to participate in
respond through the work in some sort of
meaningful way and they didn't have it
sewn up right you know they're it's
almost like there's an intense searching
through these exhibitions but I would
argue that it really fundamentally sets
the tone for political art after 68
and I'm just gonna end with this last
slide of wealth Arnold's work who you
yeah baby from 1968 this work was shown
in the Fagin exhibition it was produced
by the only gay artist the only
african-american artist included in
Fagin show and in fact there was only
one woman Lee Bontecou also included in
those 65 artist and Fagin shows so that
gives us a sense of you know the
discriminate discriminatory nature of
the high art establishment even up until
the 1980s what one would argue even up
until today but I want to end with this
work specifically because of Arnold's
involvement at the time when he produced
this work and at the same time as Fagin
show he was involved in the South Side
community art center as well as an
artist and resident and art and soul a
collaborative art space in North
Lawndale initiated by the MCA Chicago in
an unusual partnership with CVL or the
conservative vicelords a new
manifestation of the West Side gangs and
actually the art historian Rebecca
Zurich a Northwestern faculty member has
written extensively on Arnold's
connection in art and soul in some ways
this work photo collages commenting on
gender sexuality race and politics
despite being included in Fagin show
demonstrate how focused and in some ways
limited my inquiry is in other words I'm
looking at predominantly white male
artists in high-end galleries with tons
of commercial viability and in
established collections yet it still
draws forward questions about the
efficacy of political art and its
ability to intervene in current conflict
if the events of 1968 could infiltrate
that tightly controlled context things
must have been pretty bad baigan shows
and the other protest exhibitions
demonstrate the tenuous relation between
the gallery wall and what's happening in
the street and while we often pretend
otherwise these sites are intimately
connected right we often pretend Art's
more concerned with the philosophical
the esoteric or the aesthetic the events
of August 1968 helped remind us of the
reciprocity is between cultural
production and lived social experience
which in an era of black lives matter in
the me tube movement are crucially
important to consider today thanks
everyone
[Applause]
okay that leaves me I may be still a
peck and in addition to curating this
series I've been involved teaching at
Mozilla since 1980 I'm a former editor
and writer for Rolling Stone where I met
Anthony Chicago Daily News and the
Chicago sun-times my books include
uncovering the 60s the life and times of
the underground press and tonight I want
to do is try to Slamdance art and
politics together a certain kind of
politic by recounting the intersection
between the highly graphic underground
paper that I worked at fifty years ago
the Chicago seed and both the permit
follows the mayor's office and the
political street theater of specifically
of the hippies this is one Rashomon
occasion of what happened here there are
many others we've heard of others we'll
hear about those on August 8th but but
here we go
so the underground press start well
first Here I am so there I was nice
college boy in 1965 my cameo appearance
in the United States Army Reserves in
1967 spent right after that went to the
summer of love and then by 1969 I was a
winner of the Charles Manson look-alike
contest the and the first bar line I had
in the seed was yes Abraham yippie so
the other girl press started we really
was a surge it went from a handful of
papers to more than 500 perhaps even a
thousand papers to be came out the high
school papers the prison paper is the GI
papers the black dwarf I think it's on
air somewhere and then Anthony mentioned
and it was a worldwide phenomenon and
the reason it came about was because
people were not seeing themselves
represented whether you know and the
papers themselves would evolve you know
you'd go to a demonstration you get it
don't you get chased out you protest in
the war and you read about how the war
was great the next day or you play some
music or smoke some plants or whatever
it was
and you know that was demonic behavior
in terms of what Anthony presented it's
important to know that when the Rolling
Stones came here in 1964 the Chicago
Tribune interviewed them on the street
saw the Tribune building and they
brought a barber down to meet them in
any event the first underground paper
that generally was agreed to be the Los
Angeles Free Press a couple of important
things about the Free Press it came out
of the Renaissance pleasure faire so
there's the culture but as you can see
this was their response to the Watts
rebellion that it wasn't just a fire you
know next it was a fire this time but
that it was actually more political than
the papers were letting it on the Los
Angeles Times won a Pulitzer for its
coverage but this was a different kind
of coverage looking from a from a
different frame and the Berkeley barb
the enraged ink blot of the East Bay you
know would cover demonstrations for the
protesters point of view and and
encourage was an activist thing block
those troop trains that are taking
people to this creep show in Vietnam the
third paper was a little tamer the paper
a a lot of a lot of brainstorming over
that name and in Michigan and it was a
the students for a Democratic Society
the largest young person's organization
of the 60s I was there of their voice
the Fifth Estate in Detroit was the
voice of the liberal element in Detroit
two years later we'll be talking about
revolution and the mc5 and but it was
again this culture and politics Dillon
and an anti-war March and the final
paper was different this was the Oracle
edited by a guy named Alan Cohn the and
it was his goal was to do LSD on paper
and it was a very it uses split fountain
technique it was very third eye ish if
you will and it really represented the
comings and goings of the Summer of Love
which is only a year and a half I went
to the Summer of Love of course being my
zelich function and I got there at 67
which is the official Summer of Love if
you talk to people who were living there
they say it was really sick
six I guess it was collapsing at 67 the
underground press we had our own
organization we had the underground
press syndicate and we had liberation
news service we were very anti copyright
everyone could that part of our power
was we could share copy from the only
other papers so we had an army of
reporters and we had this disruptive
technology that just stetner press that
could run stuff off and photo offset
presses later on and so the seed had
precursors in Chicago there was a paper
called second city which was more more
new leftist and but it was collective it
actually distributed the seeder early on
and it was against the basket you know
well you know racism poverty oppression
and another paper was new left notes the
students for Democrats to study was
located in Chicago on Madison Street and
this was the organ of students for
Democratic Society that would be chapter
filings but it was also people going to
the North Vietnam and reporting from the
other side of the war the Cee'd lasted
to seven years and this is a Wikipedia
entry which I did not write that it was
a known as quite a pretty paper but it
was also eclectic and non doctrinaire
even as a radicalized we did try to
include other groups so the seed started
Trish mentioned something about the
maleness of the papers and David
mentioned perhaps the sexism of it this
was a first series of covers and our
people here from the seed veterans of
the seed this was before I got there
this was the what we called me called
sarcastically the pretty girl cover is
aware it's at genre of the seed the seed
was started by an artist and a head shop
owner and it was purchased later on by a
photographer and a graphic artist who
had the illusion that they were going to
run a profit-making paper and and
there were it was 12 pages and content
wise it was it was really kind of
picaresque this was the Summer of Love
there's people wandering around it was a
lot of the stories about road trips and
we're on this journey and we had all
again that we had one of the things that
people at the paper wanted to do was
have a bian and this being was a Lincoln
Park it was in early as 1967 and this
was a run up and then pictures from the
bee in and it had Dylan and it had
Ginsberg and but inside there aside from
the poetry that was an article called
abolish the draft by someone from the
students for democratic society the
prose was tribes assemble at North Beach
North Avenue beach on the fourteenth day
of May the torch of love and external
brotherhood arrived in Chicago it was
dispersed by the police at five o'clock
and there was the we had our kind of we
again we had a lot of art this was the
kind of split fountain so you could run
these color washes another disruptive
technology I don't know who did this
graphic but we also had what we call
does speed graphics you know I'm not
saying this one I don't know who would
want to get sued by him I'm not sure the
provenance of this one but but it was a
lot of very detailed stuff and the
people who are on methedrine actually
served a very important function at the
scene because we had to use negatives as
we had a stipple the negatives to make
sure they were all opaque and these guys
were really good at that it kept them
quite busy even though we had the Holy
Trinity and kind of Anthony mentioned
sex this is one of the tamer ones drugs
interview with one of Leary's cohorts
and of course rock and roll and and we
had our business you might be curious
what our business model was neo raise
your hand one of our street sellers was
here we saw we have the famous video go
down cool down down to the corner and we
sold papers on the street we sold them
at headshots we sell them to clothing
stores there are a lot of hip
advertisers we were price to move and we
keep the paper afloat so
we but we were covering we all saw again
this poem was one good enough to run but
we also had we had folders of different
kind of material movement politics you
know rock and roll are by far our
largest contributors file was what we
eventually called no more goddamn hippie
poetry because people would send in
stuff about how their toenails grew
during their trip and you know some of
them are actually quite good some of
them weren't weren't ready for prime
time but we had that folder we satellite
we satirized the Straits down the block
Marina City and still had it's Midwest
roots and we did cover movement politics
we covered resistance in Madison
resistance in Washington in the same
issue we had the Oakland draft protest
of the article on Che Guevara and an
article on Jimi Hendrix and I did go to
the Pentagon March David you're wrong
the Pentagon did levitate and and I was
with a guy to get arrest and he was not
treated well but we this was kind of our
politics that was kind of a narco
communal I would call it you know we
didn't like leaders we were trying to
build counter institutions that weren't
capitalistic if you will that would be
supporting all these vaunted Vogel who
were floating around the country trying
to find the next scene and we had the
hip job call up in places like that
probably better at being hip and being
cooperative than finding jobs but that's
a different issue and but and then enter
the hippies so in March of 1968 the
liberation news service our Associated
Press of the of the underground
announced the hippies and the hippies
slogan had two slogans we demand the
politics of ecstasy misspelled but you
know it was very ecstatic nevertheless
and abandoned the creeping meat ball and
the idea of the hippies was that
movement politics was Stalin boring and
just recreating endless meetings and
that things meanwhile people were
bleeding to death in Vietnam and
inner-city and that needed something
else and the idea was to have a street
theatre anarchic kind of kind of politic
and the roots were in the Free Speech
Movement in Berkeley and in the diggers
who were kind of in San Francisco
especially also New York were kind of a
free this free that built a lot of
institutions in San Francisco during the
summer of love so this was off this was
the first announcement from liberation
is everything we of course ran it
because it was part and parcel of what
was going on I thought if I wrote to
Paul Krassner who was the editor of the
proto underground or the realist and and
got Jerry Rubin is my visit in my black
lit apartment on building Avenue and
talked to me about what this great
festival was going to be it was really
going to be a disruptive festival but
disruptive creatively and was gonna
represent the real alternative to the
Democratic Party a party the death party
if you will and to solid politics so I
wrote the first piece in the seed and
you know really talking about it as a
level non leader event and again the
politics of ecstasy and the and the
threats were made you know about acid in
the water supply and kidnapping the
delegates who believe that well guess
who you know and the there was a big
debate about the Yippies The Village Inn
in March of 68 there was a demonstration
in Grand Central Station a Yip in a lot
of people showed up someone climbed if
you know Grand Central Station it's a
big clock in the center of it someone
climbed and started manhandling the
hands and the cops broke it up quite
strongly Village Voice wrote a piece
someone who was all allied with the
hippies wrote this piece saying with
somehow a prophecy of Chicago the Barbra
guy named Mike rossmann who was a very
thoughtful movement guy he really and he
knew Jerry Rubin quite well he hated it
and you thought it was deeply dangerous
and irresponsible with spectacular
organizing what
I knew left notes interestingly enough
you know an SDS had a real problem
trying to figure out its position in
Chicago was it coming to demonstrate
wasn't coming to to radicalize the
McCarthy kids they thought we were using
rock and pot to put kids up against the
bayonets yawn when our old boss your
boss
really he knew the band's and he was not
a radical self-appointed coder a without
a legitimate constituency as corrupt as
the political machine it helped the
disrupt to which Abbie Hoffman the
hippie visionary had later labeled him
the Benedict Arnold of the 60s and but
others were supportive Julius Lester who
was one of the most thoughtful writers
at the Guardian not the British Guardian
but the radical paper The Guardian I one
of the frankly one of the few black
writers in the underground press the
other nut press was pale and male at
this point and he liked he liked the
idea that it was that was there was
politicizing hippies that it wasn't just
people looking to get stung but they had
Abbie Hoffman saying was a hippie as a
hippie who's been hit over the head with
a nightstick and and it was also
avoiding New Left nitpicking and he saw
the hippies as the liberated zone Jerry
always the carnival barker in some ways
even though he's very very clever
organizer told me for my book as long as
the Chicago is accepted as a legitimate
activity that people had an opinion
about I won that kind of PT Barnum
theory of politics and but we the seed
was on board so we had our meeting and
this is in the paper or not so kind of
black and white this wasn't the full
flower of the seed and the meeting was
raided I actually had to work that night
I had a job as a waiter so I can make a
living and you know and I missed the
meeting and the the police raided the
meeting and there were 20 or 20 arrests
the cops only mentioned the 13 men not
the seven women interestingly enough and
the other article is a the guy was
flashing the v's of one of the seminal
seed people tree man and he was figure
into this later on
and I wrote also on the side there an
open layer to let it to the mayor that
that I'll talk about in a second well
talk about now I guess the letter talked
to you know talked about to the mayor it
said you know your honor we'd be happy
to mediate and this is these kinds of
arrests really don't work and so let's
cut Leo let's not do that
the and we got some we got to the answer
we were signed a deputy mayor to
negotiate with us with the Central
Casting name of stall and and he was a
compadre there the the next big issue
for uh-oh this is important so later on
a former student of mine the first time
I ever talked was at Columbia College
here in Chicago a woman named Linda
Merman wrote for the reader wrote this
this was the red squad spy at that
meeting the red squad was the undercover
cops who were anti you know and anti
left anti-political and the guy was
saying they all sat around flashing
light talking drinking a blowing pot the
place is a real crash pad with weird
black lights
drinking wine listening closely to the
conversation kir the guys named party
with the hippies for almost an hour
quote finally it hit me that the best
way to make identify everybody was to
raid the place I slipped out and called
my co-workers at the 18th district and
that was our raid things this way I have
to say you know we heard some doer
remarks and justified about that time we
were having a good time this was not the
this was not you know remembered the
politics of ecstasy and however you
spelled it there was still some feeling
that we could get this thing going
people were freaking freely people were
having fun people are putting out a
paper they loved and but here's the
letter for daily that I wrote you know
you you could shut this thing down but
are the forces of your disposal
sufficient to answer public outrage as
the sons and daughters of your white
middle class or arrested beaten or worse
the city was really much more afraid for
it I get to the next slide of something
else but we were afraid of the aftermath
of this this was our Martin Luther King
issue which actually came out several
weeks after he was killed and we were
just
I wrote a back page screed about there
was really it was my despair David you
know about how everyone whether you're a
freak or a political or racist or
whatever that this has been a body blow
and we were all well complicit to this
kind of racism and we had covered the
National Convention for new politics a
radical event but we were also running
articles how to organize tree man wrote
that article he also managed to get
arrested in the park for loitering and
this was really you know a horrible
horrible watershed for us we then went
to I don't know if anyone here meaning
you might have been there the April 27th
peace march and this was the March where
it was little old ladies for peace
suburban veteran as a bourbon dentist
against the war and the police were
crushed it I had a friend who a Bedford
later who was a cop at this event and he
was ordered everyone was ordered to make
arrests and this was cadre the Chicago
area draft resisters wrote this that you
daily this was a shutdown by daily we
solarized these pictures a line
affinities of yours and i and but we was
still yippee you know we were flowering
the split fountain thing artistically
was beginning to happen for us we had a
demonstration we could we were going to
give we were still kind of freaking
freely we were going to give at an apple
pie Mother's Day event and we went down
to the atheist district with some pies
and the police decided they would not
accept the pies but it was okay to give
them to st. Vincent's Hospital around
the corner so if the pies were in fact
dosed then we really weren't going to
have the Flying Nun but the but she put
her yippie button on and you know a bee
who had been through the New York stuff
and was a tough heavy food in the south
and was a tougher organizer he put out a
flyer saying pies next time
so that was a little split already look
Fisher beginning to form we put out
because we had this April 27th bus the
free city survival committee was
negotiating for permits with the city
put out a flyer
we had a benefit at The Electric Theater
which Anthony mentioned and lo and
behold a new bus to worry about 1,400
people are thrown out 26 people were
arrested
we need another benefit to pay for this
benefit you know and we obviously wrote
about that the whole summer was a summer
of meetings field trips we went they
were showing us venues that they would
never give us who went to Soldier Field
and we was standing on about the 40-yard
line and tree man and I went next to
each other and he looked at me and said
Lions and Christians in the locked in
there or something
and eventually I and some other
signatories you know for the reasons
that Anthony expressed and and you know
we withdraw our signature our signatures
and on the grounds that this really was
going to be a confrontation and this was
me over there with of course tree man
don't come if you expect no more than
five days of music and love life musical
love but do come if you deem change
necessary we're trying to walk a
tightrope we was we were prescient we
were true to the tribe and we were we
had our fear self we knew was going to
be a snuff and this was some of the
convention coverage from other people
flyers students for the left knew left
notes and this was our cover for the
convention a big fold out of a pregnant
office worker with Timothy Leary poetry
but also barbed wire fences and Abby and
I had a debate in the paper I was saying
if you're coming to Chicago great be
sure to wear some armor in your hair as
opposed to flower is that change that
Anthony said in a short period of time
and Abbey wrote something I think that
was very prescient the scene is a
movement paper that teaches by example
look we are a family here is our soul
it's an important message but the seed
is the last in the line of flower papers
maybe the other seed people wouldn't
miss it too wouldn't be working so hard
for it and loeb all we were working hard
during the whole convention I really
kind of became a reporter I covered
the I was in the park every night Linkin
Park was my territory
went down to Han wrote in hospital which
doesn't exist anymore as they were
bringing people who are beaten in really
covered the street and we were sitting
in our office and suddenly we hadn't
lost that fortunately was you had to
walk in and go down some steps and
suddenly our window shattered
we had to shot at our office had been
shot at and we this we will holy fools
we ran outside and the only car was a
blue-and-white car cruising slowly north
it was a message from the the guys
around the corner
this was our speed through the rest of
the slides because the convention is
over now this was our watershed a guy
some of you know Michael James came in
who you stolen the heartland cafe and
would be in another paper called rising
up angry came into my office and said we
used to be this and they took my hand
and he folded it now with this and that
was a kind of a change in the paper and
we went through all these but how long
the police would to give us the middle
finger saluted to the dirty but during
the conspiracy trial I was back right
after Woodstock I came back here and
that was more of our split fountain art
in service of the trial but also
catching a certain amount of movement on
we stopped the trial stop this stop
everything napalm was now a cover story
we were covering the war constantly as a
dragged on we were very eco conscious
even though if you took a look at the
seed office you'd never think so you
know we had our continued critique of
consumerism we did this liberate
yourself now car get rid of credit get
rid of the money economy we got 300
requests for the card which can never
fulfill of course but we had what trees
that they plant this was the People's
Park cover from Berkeley and again we
were trying to build this counter
community we're trying to build
liberated zones of Leuven organizations
the heads and the fists were coming
together you know red star and pot armed
arm arms and guitars and we try to make
radical points artfully we tried to go
to stir you know to tropes if you will
baseball cards but for underground
artists poets that put the Pope
underground our political leaders the
Statute of Liberty seems Trish skull
really we're a theme huh and rising up
angry was a new bloom came along trying
to organize white tougher white
working-class kids and then this was the
other watershed the rate of the
essentially a murder team operation
Phoenix comes to Chicago of the killing
of two Black Panthers in Chicago in
December 69 we put out a broadside the
team of the state of the city did a its
own TV show that was exposed by both
underground and overground media and our
politics were becoming more and more
counterculture we had a lot of comics
and the comics were put in services of
politics with a certain cut skip lamps
and the cartoonists unfortunately died
fairly recently but there's a certain
kind of you know tweaking of ourselves
you know are we serious radicals or not
it got very serious there was a bombing
a day in America by 1970 and the
revolution within the revolution the
feminization of the paper the paper
became a collective the revolutions were
coming so fast and furious that this was
a double revolution issue we had the
Native American if she'll because the
Native Americans had taken over it
believe it or not I don't know if you
remember this it was a Nike base along
the lake Madison Street and and that was
our mini Alcatraz here and the gay
rights revolution so I don't know how
many gay Indians read the paper that at
that issue but a bunch or some but we
did a double revolution there and then
Kent State happened and but we came out
late for Kent State and inside we had
this kind of tough coverage but there
was a paper called the San Jose red eye
that ran this graphic and somehow that
really appealed to us it was just oh my
god can you believe they did this you
know so it's a it's Mickey Mouse wearing
a Richard Nixon watch and that was our
best selling issue deal probably made a
living that week they sold 35,000 copies
very quickly and then the seed soldier
on it until 1974 but believe it or not
in the midst of crying for a revolution
we had a pair of taxes so we wouldn't
get closed down and I was gone by then
but they kind of stopped paying them in
the
men came and it was just it was this
time people the ad base was gone people
wanted a second pair of jeans people
were burned out the war the US was out
of Vietnam even though the war raged on
for so that was it so it of course the
irony of course in the long straight
trip as my book on the underground press
got me tenure and but this was the ride
and an attempt to have art and politics
fuse around political movements it's a
couple of thoughts about today I'm going
to have a whole panel on August 8th I
hope you come bring Pearlstein Don Rose
Charles Whitaker and a young
intersectional activists Charlene
Carruthers I'll be here to talk about
the legacy but just a few thoughts there
was revolution men didn't happen but
doing many positive changes some of
which are now being the counter
counterculture is attacking multiple
points of view replaced the journalistic
voice of God but of course now we have
so many voices it's Babel and then Trump
is the aisle in an odd way is the
ultimate yippie tactician politics very
different but he knows how to use
spectacle and sensation and pseudo
events so here we are and here we go
again so so I'm going ask the panelists
to come back up if you will and we'll
take the we'll take your questions I
thank you very much and God the because
c-span is taping we have to ask you to
come up to take questions so anyone who
wants to ask a question please come
just because Rick go ahead please we no
longer have a mic here Oh what we'll
pass it along
hi Hank
will I be bit should I speak here or
what yeah so anyway it was so great
about the seed because that is really
how I remember the 60s the alternative
press all of our alternative spaces we
had a little bookstore on Armitage
Avenue and we were also alternative
artists but we were surrealist and
psychedelic artists and it's it's hard
to look back and place some of the
importance on some of the older artists
when we lived in a world of youth and it
was our own culture and really quite
separate from the other society so I I
hardly recognized some of the
descriptions of Chicago even though I
worked in the fda's national office and
I was had a lot of the riots now we had
an exhibition on Eugenie's free
surrealist exhibition in Lincoln Park
and the three papers reviewed it but one
of them came in and said Oh surrealist
your surrealist and then they even they
started talking politically and so the
people in the gallery surrealist but
we're also anti and when it paper that
was going it was anti materialist
materialist so anyway we recently had
another alternative show celebrating our
50th anniversary of the protest show so
there was a pal at the University of
Chicago and all sorts of things but I
really look back on those days and
wonder the things we did they were
fantastic and I'm also very sad because
when we lost 58,000 people in that war I
mean we were sure our we would lose our
or our boyfriends or our girlfriends and
it was a very serious crime and I don't
know how we managed to keep our optimism
but we did and so I hope we will again
thank you for nella P right and why do
you say who you are also yeah just
identify yourself yeah I'm Penelope
Rosemont and Chicago surrealist still
painting and doing things like that I
worked with SDS for a long time and then
I worked with the Charles a Shakur
publishing company great thanks Rick I'm
Rick Pearlstein I write about this
period the thing that struck me reading
mailers accounts of the Pentagon
protests armies of the night and his
work on the Democratic convention was
the bad guys are kind of felt kind of
like stocked cardboard characters to me
one thing that sticks out in my mind is
he refers to one of the young military
police he describes him in great detail
his face as he did with daily I think
and calls him a fascist and I remember
thinking well he's probably might even
be a draftee you know he has is the same
age as the people he's arresting I
didn't feel like mailer saw the people
he opposed politically as some problems
to be understood but foils for the story
who was telling am i misremembering um a
miami is that unfair pathetic and
unsympathetic passages about the
military police in in armies of the
night and
yes I'm trying to recall because he does
this discuss how these guys come from
small towns and get drafted and pushed
into them either they are the army of
the National Guard or military police
and he doesn't do that with sympathy
when he faces them you know in ranks
he's certainly not sympathetic and
they've some of them behaved very
violently in Washington and certainly
here so I mean in those days there were
limits to to empathy which I think
you're suggesting is that's a spiritual
failure I mean a journalistic failure
you know I mean there's so much work
that other people did that was so
interesting I would think of a Chicagoan
since we're talking about the rivalry
between New York and Chicago named John
Schultz who wrote an amazing book about
the convention and an amazing book about
the Chicago seven trial which he writes
about the jury in the debates that went
on about child rearing things like that
well I just update the issue which is a
Frank Rich wrote a piece of New York
Magazine of about seven or eight months
head to the election and said to hell
with the Trump voters because there have
been you know lots of books and and some
good ones about the people who voted for
Trump or and the kind of culture that
they were in the different things they
had in his point was if they can't see
that their own interests are not being
represented by the Republican Party
they're not going to see anything so I
mean that's an updating of the okay
anyone else can you come up
and say y'all yeah hi my name is Alex
King I'm part of the Goodman theater
musical theatre program and we're doing
something yes oh my name is Alex King
I'm part of the Goodman theater musical
theater program and we're actually
studying 1968 right now and I'm just my
question is how through media and art do
we create conversation between sort of
this older generation in the 1960s and
the newer generation that is alive and
thriving right now but well well that's
right well I'll be the first I'll be the
first geezer to respond and first I
should add that Trish was born in 1969
so we last time we decide she was
conceived during the convention but the
I think it's I think well one thing we
have to do is you know as predecessors
is listen and there is but there is
stuff to learn from our experiences pro
and con and I think social media is a
place where that can come together and I
also think that as we again hardened my
one of my less I mean one of my lessons
is to me to be be bold but that one
another lesson is that if you make the
eye of the needle too thin not very many
people could fit through it so we have
to be both expansive and still have some
principles and standards yeah yeah yeah
I don't think well yeah I was gonna say
I mean I mean I teach and you know I'm
struck I mean I think young people are
often sort of caricatured really in in
the media I'm struck by how open
students are to talking about you know
these kinds of experiences and interest
in finding out about it and similarly
they're interested in kind of sharing I
mean I think you know with social media
I mean that's certainly one way but I
mean events like this and
other ways to just kind of honestly
bring what your experience is I mean
right at the moment I mean I really feel
that the four summers in the exact term
is escaping me but I think we need a big
tent you know are they excluding people
you know for one reason or another you
know you know when things are really
going well you can start having those
fights but I think at the moment you
know age and you know all of the other
kind of things that might divide people
who think of themselves as progressive
you know maybe should be set aside and I
think your question of finding ways to
explore them is is definitely important
I was going to but we'll have time
everyone's would have staying we can
always talk but okay this the
sociologist Daniel Bell described
himself as a socialist in economics or
liberal and politics and a conservative
in culture
well that's a joke but it sort of
describes me and so I would say of
course we have to listen to what your
concerns are and what your hopes and
frustrations and fears and desires are
Barossa ask you guys to exercise some
historical consciousness to get them out
of pop culture and media culture all the
time I mean that I've been I you know as
a movie critic for 45 years and
internally I was always fleeing so in
writing other things so I mean then that
I mean I don't care how square this
sounds but it means you know seeing old
movies seeing great old plays when they
revived reading people like mail or any
great literature and even journalism
from Abe's period in my period in other
words exercise historical consciousness
and try to just find the best stuff you
can
[Applause]
my name is dawn rose I'm going to be
speaking next week I'm gonna be speaking
next week but and I'm gonna expand on
this point but I think just for the sake
of historical accuracy the Yippies were
not the primary organisers of the
demonstrations at the convention right
they were and it hadn't been mentioned
here but just in case just for those of
you who won't be here next week an
organization called the national
mobilization Committee to end the war in
Vietnam which had been sponsoring peace
marches for several years including a
million-person march in New York began
organizing right after the Pentagon
march daveandellen sir and Tom Hayden
were the leaders of this Rennie Davis
another person who became a conspiracy
conspiracy trial subject and defendant
that's the word I was looking for start
and and the the Mobe included a very
wide range of civil rights radical
political all kinds of organizations
that included the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference and early SDS and
students for Democratic Society by the
time of the convention and then later
joined it but earlier leaders of the
students or Democratic Society included
people like Tom Hayden and the marked
the organizing went on from November of
67 on through the the entire convention
and the main rally that was broken up
and the March that was being planned the
was that the marks that never took place
was organized by the mold and joined by
a lot of the hippies who had made their
base in Lincoln Park so I just wanted to
know we're all doing pieces of a puzzle
right yeah so it's it's there's just too
many pieces so I've decided next week to
give a brief yeah everything that
happens at the convention is to keep us
saying this next month but yes we look
forward to it that Mimi once you come
out and then and then we'll take one
more question after Mimi because we have
some closing business you agent
[Music]
but I just have to say apropos of what
Don just said that that's that's true
historically that's who did the main
organizing and so on but it was really
the Yippies who spoke to so many of us
who were kind of more countercultural
and trying trying new things and so on
the national mobilization I would not
take away from its importance but it
didn't have the heart and the soul of
what was happening with all of us who
were young at that time thank you
okay anyone else okay all right we're
going to stay I want to I want to make
sure you know that the panelists will
have books will be available to signing
Bethenny will have her CDs it will
probably have other stuff but we want to
we have some closing business again our
next panel which Don will be as and the
others will be at is August 8th
please come and Bethany can we get you
back wherever you are and Patrick thanks
you're watching American history TV only